---
layout: default
title: "POLSC323: European Politics"
course_description: "An examination of historical and contemporary issues in European politics. Topics include the wars of religion, the pre-colonial era, the First and Second World Wars, and the formation of the European Union (EU)."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "POLSC323: European Politics"
-------------------------------------------------

The study of Europe, and its role in the world today, is a story of both
tragedy and triumph.  From the ashes of centuries of continental
conflict through two World Wars and finally into integration by
invitation, the European continent has taken what some have deemed the
first tentative steps away from the jealously guarded system of
sovereign independent states.  With each shaky step away from its near
five-hundred-year-old origins in the bosom of Kantian ideals and the
Westphalia system (see works cited for *Perpetual Peace* by Immanuel
Kant; the Westphalia system will be discussed in Unit 1), the continent
finds itself in conflict with the very nature of its original intent. 
Over the past half century, we have seen Europe move away from the world
of nation-states and embrace the still largely undefined and constantly
evolving idea of member-states. Yet, Europe and the many states within
her bounds also guard their position within the realm of international
society.  With states flinching away from cultural encroachment and
protecting traditional (and often nationalistic) values, the European
experiment has many challenges ahead of it still.  Even as the debate
between "pooled sovereignty" (the idea of sharing decision-making power
between nation-states) and a "common market" (the idea of eliminating or
reducing trade barriers and having a common approach to  external trade
within a group of nation-states) winds itself to a shaky but predicted
close, the idea of Europe has taken on new meaning with fast growing
minorities, the inclusion of much of the former Soviet Eastern Bloc, the
aging of social capitalism, and questions of what it means to be a
European and how Europe positions itself in a globalized world. This
course will examine the European experiment, paying particular attention
to its process of integration into the most powerful supranational
entity to have ever existed: the European Union.  We will look at this
process and a sampling of its key component historical and political
units with a few particular questions in mind: Why has this happened in
Europe and not elsewhere in the world?  Why is it happening now?  How
has this process impacted the way the world does business?  What
possible conclusion can we expect? The course is divided into four
broadly connected yet unique sections that will help us along our
journey toward understanding how Europe works.  In Unit One, we will
examine how Europe emerged from the Wars of Religion and developed into
the system of sovereign states that eventually, through centuries of
conflict, would become the Europe we know today.  This will provide
important insight into why Europe willingly united despite numerous
efforts to accomplish the goal by force.  In Unit Two, we will look at
the broadening and deepening of the European Union in the post-World War
II environment.  As part of this unit, we will touch on the key
institutions that define the EU and the key policies from which European
states have willingly pooled their sovereignty.  Unit Three offers a
sampling of the major states that make up the EU, or, as in the case of
Russia and Turkey, help define larger European dynamics.  We will divide
this section into "Old" and "New" to delineate traditional centers of
European power from emerging states within modern European politics. 
Finally, in Unit Four, the course will take on a sample of important
contemporary issues that the EU and Europe face.  From the graying of
much of Western Europe to integration issues facing minority
populations, this section hopes to tackle many of the challenges that
stand in the way of the next steps in European Integration.  We will end
this final unit, and the course, by examining the idea of European
identity and asking how Europe’s post-modern ideals may challenge to the
modern world.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:  

-   Summarize the emergence of modern Europe and the challenge of
    competing European nationalisms and nation states to European peace
    and prosperity.
-   Describe the emergence of the post World War II European peace
    project that has taken primary form in the development of the
    contemporary institutions of the European Union while addressing the
    public and foreign policy issue areas of primary concern to
    Europeans, including economic, development, and security issues.
-   Assess the challenges confronting traditional national state
    identity among the political communities of West Europe since World
    War II, which has gained renewed focus with the end of the Cold War
    and the re-emergence of the question of the relationship of Western
    Europe to Eastern Europe.
-   Analyze the international and national public policy challenges that
    continue to determine both the policy agenda within the European
    Union and the institutional evolution of the European Union to meet
    these challenges. 

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband internet access  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader of Flash)  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.)  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf).  
  
 √    Have completed all courses listed in “[The Core
Program](http://www.saylor.org/majors/political-science/)” of the
Political Science Major 

### Course Information

Welcome to **POLSC323:** **European Politics**. General information
about this course and its requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Course Designer: **[Dr. Benedict E.
DeDominicis](http://www.saylor.org/faculty-a-g/#DrBenedictEDeDominicis)  
    
 **Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned material.
All units build on previous units, so it will be important to progress
through the course in the order presented.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the assessments at the end of each unit in this course.   
  
 In order to *pass* this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.   
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately 47 hours to complete. Each unit includes a time advisory
that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit
and assignment. These time advisories should help you plan your time
accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at the time advisories
before beginning this course in order to determine how much time you
have over the next few weeks to complete each unit. Then, you can set
goals for yourself. For example, Unit 1 should take you approximately
11.75 hours to complete. Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and
decide to complete Subunit 1.1 (a total of 1.5 hours) on Monday night,
Subunit 1.2 (a total of 4.5 hours) on Tuesday night and Subunit 1.3 (a
total of 4.5 hours) on Wednesday night, etc.  
    
**Table of Contents:** You can find the course's units at the links below.

- [Unit 1](https://legacy.saylor.org/polsc323/Unit01/)
- [Unit 2](https://legacy.saylor.org/polsc323/Unit02/)
- [Unit 3](https://legacy.saylor.org/polsc323/Unit03/)
- [Unit 4](https://legacy.saylor.org/polsc323/Unit04/)
- [Unit 5](https://legacy.saylor.org/polsc323/Unit05/)
